[HUDI-8221][RFC-82] Concurrency control of schema evolution (#12005)
apache/hudi: rfc/rfc-82/rfc-82.md

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
-->
# RFC-82: Concurrency control of schema evolution

## Proposers

- @jonvex
- @Davis-Zhang-Onehouse

## Approvers
- @yihua
- @sivabalan

## Status

JIRA: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HUDI-8221

## Abstract

This RFC proposes to enhance Hudi's concurrency control mechanism to handle concurrent schema evolution scenarios. The current implementation does not adequately address conflicts that may arise when multiple transactions attempt to alter the table schema simultaneously. This enhancement aims to detect and prevent such conflicts, ensuring data consistency and integrity in multi-writer environments.

## Background

### Hudi Schema
In Apache Hudi, schema management is a critical component that ensures data consistency and facilitates efficient data processing, especially in environments where data structures may evolve over time.

> The schema of the input data represents the structure of incoming records being ingested into Hudi from various sources. During a write operation, the Hudi write client utilizes a write schema, which is typically derived from the input data schema or specified by a schema provider. This write schema is applied throughout the transaction to maintain consistency.

Reviewer: Add highlight to the defined terms.
```suggestion
The schema of the input data represents the structure of incoming records being ingested into Hudi from various sources. During a write operation, the Hudi write client utilizes a **write schema**, which is typically derived from the input data schema or specified by a schema provider. This write schema is applied throughout the transaction to maintain consistency.
```

Author: done for all

> Additionally, Hudi stores the table schema within the commit metadata on storage, capturing the authoritative schema of the hudi table table at the time of each commit. This stored schema is crucial for readers to correctly interpret the data and for managing schema evolution across different data versions. These schemas are determined through a reconciliation process that considers both the incoming data schema and the existing table schema, allowing Hudi to handle schema changes gracefully. Currently, Hudi uses this schema management approach to enable seamless read and write operations, support upserts and deletes, and manage schema evolution, ensuring that the system remains robust even as the underlying data structures change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, Hudi stores the **table schema** within the commit metadata on storage, capturing the authoritative schema of the hudi table table at the time of each commit. This stored schema is crucial for readers to correctly interpret the data and for managing schema evolution across different data versions. These schemas are determined through a reconciliation process that considers both the incoming data schema and the existing table schema, allowing Hudi to handle schema changes gracefully. Currently, Hudi uses this schema management approach to enable seamless read and write operations, support upserts and deletes, and manage schema evolution, ensuring that the system remains robust even as the underlying data structures change.
```

Author: done for all

### Concurrency control over concurrent schema evolution
Hudi supports concurrency control to handle concurrent write operations. However, the existing implementation does not specifically account for schema evolution conflicts. In a multi-writer environment, it's possible for different clients to attempt schema changes concurrently, which can lead to inconsistencies if not properly managed.

Schema evolution is a critical operation that can significantly impact data compatibility and query results. Uncontrolled concurrent schema changes can result in data inconsistencies, failed reads, or incorrect query results. By extending the concurrency control mechanism to handle schema evolution, we can prevent these issues and ensure a more robust and reliable data management system.

> Depending on if there are concurrent schema evolution transactions, an inflight transaction may see different schema of the table when it checks at different time, there can always be other transactions committed and potentially changed schema as a result of that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on whether there are concurrent schema evolution transactions, an inflight transaction may see a different latest schema of the table when it checks at different time, as there can always be other transactions committed and potentially changed schema as a result of that in multi-writer scenarios.
```

Author: done

We use "txn" as a abbreviation of transaction.

> | Scenario | Table Schema when Txn Start | Table Schema when Txn Validates | Schema Used by curr Txn | Should Conflict? | Write Schema used by Commit Metadata of curr Txn | Notes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Scenario | Table Schema when Txn Start | Table Schema when Txn Validates | Write Schema Used by curr Txn | Should Conflict? | New Table Schema in the Commit Metadata of curr Txn | Notes |
```

Author: done

2. Schema conflict detection logic:
   - Follow the graph as explained above.

## Rollout/Adoption Plan

1. Impact on existing users:
   - Users leveraging multi-writer capabilities with schema evolution will benefit from improved consistency.
   - No breaking changes for users not using concurrent schema evolution.

2. Phasing out older behavior:
   - The code is not protected by a feature flag, once it is merged the behavior is adopted in the next release.

3. Migration:
   - No special migration tools are required.
   - Users should update to the latest Hudi version to benefit from this enhancement.

## Test Plan

The implementation includes comprehensive test cases in the `TestHoodieClientMultiWriter`:

1. Test scenarios:
   - Covered by the table in the previous section.

2. Test variations:
   - Both COPY_ON_WRITE and MERGE_ON_READ table types

# Appendix

## Timeline of concurrency schema evolution case

**Scenario 1**

Should Conflict?: No
```
Time ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------------[ Validate ]--------------------[ Commit Txn1 ]

>             Uses Schema: S1                                                     Writes Schema: S1

Reviewer: For clarity and consistency of writing, use the same defined terms throughout (same for other scenarios)
```suggestion
            Uses writer schema: S1                                          Writes table schema in commit metadata: S1
```

Author: done

                   Evolves Schema: S1 to S2

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------------[ Validate ]--------------------[ Commit Txn1 ]
            Uses Schema: S2                                                     Writes Schema: S2

Table Schema:
          [ S1 ]--------------------------[ S2 ]----------------------------------------[ S2 ]
```
Notes:
- Both Txn1 and Txn2 aim to evolve schema from S1 to S2.
- Txn2 commits before Txn1 validates, updating schema to S2.
- Txn1 detects that schema is already S2; no conflict occurs.
- Txn1 commits successfully.

**Scenario 8**
```
Time ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->

Txn2:           [ Start Txn2 ]------------------------[ Commit Txn2 ]
                   Evolves Schema: S1 to S2

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------------[ Validate ]----X
            Uses Schema: S3

Table Schema:
          [ S1 ]--------------------------------------[ S2 ]-------------------------------------[S2]
```
Notes:
- Txn1 intends to evolve schema from S1 to S3.
- Txn2 commits before Txn1 validates, updating schema to S2.

> - At validation, Txn1 detects schema conflict (S2 vs. S3); transaction fails.

Reviewer 2: In summry, it looks like there is a simple rule for all these scenarios: validate the latest schema again the write schema during conflict resolution. There is no need to validate the start schema (before a txn) and the write schema because writer would reconcile that.

But currently we do writer schema evolving in each executors, how about different executors use different schema as the base schema to evolve then?

Author: for your first comment - we need to validate start schema to differentiate case 2 and case 6. case 6 implicitly relying on the existing schema evolution check.

> how about different executors use different schema as the base schema to evolve then?

I might miss some context here. 
- How "base schema" is defined?
- Why executors matter here? We only care 3 schemas here in OCC scenario as mentioned above. How executors breaks the format of the solution?

Reviewer 2: - the base schema is fetched right from the table in executors
- it may not cause error but it may introduce schema in-consistency because different executors uses multiple writer schema to commit, we should keep the compatibility for all these schemas. But generally I kind of think we should unify the write schema at lest in the commit level, all the executors should use one base schema to evolve to the latest write schema.

Reviewer 2: > for your first comment - we need to validate start schema to differentiate case 2 and case 6. case 6 implicitly relying on the existing schema evolution check.

Both case 2 and 6 just validate the write schema against the latest table schema, no matter whether the table schema had been evolved during the write process. 

Still we should calrify this question: how do we manage the granularity of base schemas during a write, it looks like we have a probability of unified write schema but varigated base schemas during one commit write.

Author: Discussed with Ethan and Added Q&A section in the end cover the concerns. At least for spark engine, executors uses the same writer schema from the writer config. We don't need to worry about different base schema used by executors

Even if it does we are fine, since the formula of resolving table schema at Txn start time, txn validation time and txn schema does not change. Executors (in spark) even they need to tackle different base schema it is existing behavior and we basically does not make anything worse but get better protection at least in some cases.

Reviewer: @danny0405 maybe I miss something on how Flink writer works in this case.  At least the write handle takes the write schema from the write config (set by Spark Datasource and SQL writers, Hudi Streamer on Spark), and the write schema is derived from the input data and table schema at the beginning of the transaction, so the write schema is the same across all executors.  Does Flink writer work in a different way?

Reviewer: Either case, as we discussed and @Davis-Zhang-Onehouse mentioned, the proposed concurrent schema evolution detection should be orthogonal.  We can fix any discrepancy on schema across executors if there is any in a follow-up.

Reviewer: @Davis-Zhang-Onehouse could you create a follow-up Jira ticket if needed?

Author: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HUDI-8332

Depending on whether there are concurrent schema evolution transactions, an inflight transaction may see a different latest schema of the table when it checks at different time, as there can always be other transactions committed and potentially changed schema as a result of that in multi-writer scenarios.

We use "txn" as a abbreviation of transaction.

| Scenario | Table Schema when Txn Start | Table Schema when Txn Validates | Write Schema Used by curr Txn | Should Conflict? | New Table Schema in the Commit Metadata of curr Txn | Notes |
|----------|---------------------|--------------------------|-------------------|------------------|---------------------------------------|-------|
| 1 | Not exists | Not exists | S1 | No | S1 | Current txn is the first commit ever, conflict is impossible |
| 2 | Not exists | S1 | S1 | No | S1 | Second commit, no schema evolution |

> | 3 | Not exists | S1 | S2 | Yes | N/A (throws exception) | No predefined schema, effectively concurrent schema definition. The design decision made here is to identify this as schema conflict for simplicity. It can also be broken down into cases where (1) S3 is evolvable from S2, (2) S3 is not evolvable from S2, for further optimization. |

Reviewer: Make the schema consistent with the definition and the notes
```suggestion
| 3 | Not exists | S2 | S3 | Yes | N/A (throws exception) | No predefined schema, effectively concurrent schema definition. The design decision made here is to identify this as schema conflict for simplicity. It can also be broken down into cases where (1) S3 is evolvable from S2, (2) S3 is not evolvable from S2, for further optimization. |
```

Author: done

| 4 | S1 | S1 | S1 | No | S1 | No schema evolution |
| 5 | S1 | S1 | S2 | No | S2 | Schema evolution in current transaction |
| 6 | S1 | S2 | S1 | No | S2 | Backwards compatibility handles it |
| 7 | S1 | S2 | S2 | No | S2 | Concurrent evolution to same schema |
| 8 | S1 | S2 | S3 | Yes | N/A (throws exception) | Concurrent evolution to different schemas. Same as case 2, for future optimization we should consider evolvibility from S2 to S3 |

For timeline graph of each case please refer appendix.

Notes:

> - S1, S2, S3 represent different schemas. The proposed solution does not assume compability/evolvbility among those schemas.

Reviewer: Typos: `compability/evolvbility`

Author: done

> - S1, S2, S3 represent different schemas. The proposed solution does not assume compability/evolvbility among those schemas.

Reviewer: I think you still assume that schema S2 can be evolved from schema S1 and that schema S3 can be evolved from schema S1, is that correct (otherwise the transaction fails because the schema is incompatible)?  S2 and S3 can be different and there is no assumption on the compatibility between S2 and S3.

Author: > still assume that schema S2 can be evolved from schema S1

No, it gives you such implication is because if "Table Schema when Txn Start" is s1 and "Table Schema when Txn Validates" is s2, it naturally means s2 is evolvable from s1.

The algorithm itself does not introduce NEW assumption, if this makes things more clear.

Reviewer: Sg

### Do we really need to factor in Table Schema when Txn Start for schema resolution?
Q1: In case 3 where "Table Schema when Txn Start" is None, "Table Schema when Txn Validates"(S_REAL_AT_V) is S1 and "Schema Used by curr Txn"(S_OF_TXN) is S2, we only need the later 2 factor to complete the resolution - we abort as long as the 2 are not the same. Similarly, for case 5,6,7,8 can we just compare Table Schema when Txn Validates & Schema Used by curr Txn to complete the resolution?

A: Yes we can but it is error-prone. For example, we can do follows:
```
if (cannot evolve from S_REAL_AT_V to S_OF_TXN) {
   throw ConflictSchemaEvolutionError
}

use S_REAL_AT_V or S_OF_TXN, whichever is more "general".
```

For the "general" comparison, one simple case is we find S_OF_TXN has 1 more column than S_REAL_AT_V, so we use S_OF_TXN in commit metadata (This is case 5). If it is in a reverse way that S_REAL_AT_V has 1 more column then it is case 6. If cannot evolve from S_REAL_AT_V to S_OF_TXN then it is case 8, for example, both 2 schema has columns that is absent from each other.

> Here we need to look into the content of the schema to make a call, complexity grows if there are nested columns. Compared to the proposed solution where we only need equity check, the proposed solution is more easy to make it correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we need to look into the content of the schema to make a call, complexity grows if there are nested columns. The proposed solution only needs equality check, which is simpler.
```

Author: done

            Creates Schema: S1

Txn2:            [ Start Txn2 ]------------------------[ Validate ]--------------------[ Commit Txn2 ]
                    Uses Schema: S1                                                 Writes Schema: S1

Table Schema:
          [ Not Exists ]-----------------------[ S1 ]----------------------------------[ S1 ]
```
Notes:
- Txn2 starts when the table does not exist.
- Txn1 commits before Txn2 validates, creating schema S1.
- Txn2 validates against schema S1; no conflict occurs.

**Scenario 3**
```
Time ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------[ Commit Txn1 ]
            Creates Schema: S1

Txn2:            [ Start Txn2 ]------------------------[ Validate ]----X
                    Uses Schema: S2

Table Schema:
          [ Not Exists ]-----------------------[ S1 ]----------------------------------------
```
Notes:
- Txn2 starts when the table does not exist, intending to use schema S2.
- Txn1 commits before Txn2 validates, creating schema S1.
- At validation, Txn2 detects schema conflict (S1 vs. S2); transaction fails.

> A future improvement is to check the compatibility of s1 s2 and reconcile properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A future improvement is to check the compatibility between S1 and S2 and reconcile properly.
```

Author: done

### Concurrency control over concurrent schema evolution
Hudi supports concurrency control to handle concurrent write operations. However, the existing implementation does not specifically account for schema evolution conflicts. In a multi-writer environment, it's possible for different clients to attempt schema changes concurrently, which can lead to inconsistencies if not properly managed.

Schema evolution is a critical operation that can significantly impact data compatibility and query results. Uncontrolled concurrent schema changes can result in data inconsistencies, failed reads, or incorrect query results. By extending the concurrency control mechanism to handle schema evolution, we can prevent these issues and ensure a more robust and reliable data management system.

Depending on whether there are concurrent schema evolution transactions, an inflight transaction may see a different latest schema of the table when it checks at different time, as there can always be other transactions committed and potentially changed schema as a result of that in multi-writer scenarios.

> We use "txn" as a abbreviation of transaction.

Reviewer: Add `## Design` for this section.

Also, it is useful to add a pseudo code on how to cover all these cases for implementation reference.

Author: done

|----------|---------------------|--------------------------|-------------------|------------------|---------------------------------------|-------|
| 1 | Not exists | Not exists | S1 | No | S1 | Current txn is the first commit ever, conflict is impossible |
| 2 | Not exists | S1 | S1 | No | S1 | Second commit, no schema evolution |
| 3 | Not exists | S2 | S3 | Yes | N/A (throws exception) | No predefined schema, effectively concurrent schema definition. The design decision made here is to identify this as schema conflict for simplicity. It can also be broken down into cases where (1) S3 is evolvable from S2, (2) S3 is not evolvable from S2, for further optimization. |
| 4 | S1 | S1 | S1 | No | S1 | No schema evolution |
| 5 | S1 | S1 | S2 | No | S2 | Schema evolution in current transaction |
| 6 | S1 | S2 | S1 | No | S2 | Backwards compatibility handles it |
| 7 | S1 | S2 | S2 | No | S2 | Concurrent evolution to same schema |
| 8 | S1 | S2 | S3 | Yes | N/A (throws exception) | Concurrent evolution to different schemas. Same as case 2, for future optimization we should consider evolvibility from S2 to S3 |

For timeline graph of each case please refer appendix.

Notes:

> - S1, S2, S3 represent different schemas. The proposed solution does not introduce any new assumptions on compatibility/evolvbility among those schemas. But if "Table Schema when Txn Start" is schema X and Table Schema when Txn Validates is Y, it naturally means Y is compatible and is evolved from X as it is guaranteed by today's implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- S1, S2, S3 represent different schemas. The proposed solution does not introduce any new assumptions on compatibility among those schemas. But if "Table Schema when Txn Start" is schema X and Table Schema when Txn Validates is Y, it naturally means Y is compatible and is evolved from X as it is guaranteed by today's implementation.
```

Author: done

- 3 schemas to consider:
  + The **table schema** from the last committed txn when the current txn starts.
  + The **table schema** from the last committed txn when the current txn validates.

>   + The **table schema** that the current txn uses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + The **writer schema** that the current txn uses.
```

Author: done

**Scenario 3**
```
Time ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------[ Commit Txn1 ]
            Creates Schema: S1

Txn2:            [ Start Txn2 ]------------------------[ Validate ]----X
                    Uses Schema: S2

Table Schema:
          [ Not Exists ]-----------------------[ S1 ]----------------------------------------
```
Notes:
- Txn2 starts when the table does not exist, intending to use schema S2.
- Txn1 commits before Txn2 validates, creating schema S1.
- At validation, Txn2 detects schema conflict (S1 vs. S2); transaction fails.

A future improvement is to check the compatibility of s1 s2 and reconcile properly.

**Scenario 4**
```
Time ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------------[ Validate ]--------------------[ Commit Txn1 ]
            Uses Schema: S1                                                     Writes Schema: S1

Table Schema:
          [ S1 ]------------------------------------[ S1 ]----------------------------[ S1 ]
```
Notes:

> - Txn1 operates entirely under schema S1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Txn1 operates entirely under schema S1 (there is no concurrent writer or the concurrent writer does not evolve the table schema).
```

Author: done

Reviewer: Made one minor change.

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------------[ Validate ]--------------------[ Commit Txn1 ]
            Uses Schema: S2                                                     Writes Schema: S2

Table Schema:
          [ S1 ]------------------------------------[ S1 ]----------------------------[ S2 ]
```
Notes:
- Txn1 starts with schema S1 and evolves it to S2 within the transaction.
- No other transactions interfere; no conflicts occur.

**Scenario 6**
```
Time ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->

Txn2:           [ Start Txn2 ]------------------------[ Commit Txn2 ]
                   Evolves Schema: S1 to S2

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------------[ Validate ]--------------------[ Commit Txn1 ]
            Uses Schema: S1                                                     Writes Schema: S2

Table Schema:
          [ S1 ]---------------------------------------[ S2 ]---------------------------------[ S2 ]
```
Notes:
- Txn1 starts with schema S1.
- Txn2 commits before Txn1 validates, evolving the schema to S2.
- Txn1 validates against schema S2; backward compatibility allows it to proceed.

> - Txn1 writes data compatible with S2; commits successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Txn1 writes data compatible with S2; commits successfully with the table schema S2, instead of the write schema S1.
```

Author: done

For timeline graph of each case please refer appendix.

Notes:
- S1, S2, S3 represent different schemas. The proposed solution does not introduce any new assumptions on compatibility among those schemas. But if "Table Schema when Txn Start" is schema X and Table Schema when Txn Validates is Y, it naturally means Y is compatible and is evolved from X as it is guaranteed by today's implementation.
- 3 schemas to consider:
  + The **table schema** from the last committed txn when the current txn starts.
  + The **table schema** from the last committed txn when the current txn validates.
  + The **writer schema** that the current txn uses.
- "Not exists" means the table is empty and **table schema** is not set.

## Implementation

The proposed implementation involves the following key changes:

1. Enhance the `TransactionUtils` class to include schema conflict detection:
   - Add a new interface `SchemaConflictResolutionStrategy` to check for schema conflicts.
   - Add an implementation to this new interface `SimpleSchemaConflictResolutionStrategy` which implements the table above.

2. Schema conflict detection logic:
   - Follow the graph as explained above.

> sudo code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pseudo code:
```

Author: done

> ```
> // Initialize schemas
> schemaOfTxn = current transaction schema
> schemaAtTxnStart = schema at transaction start (if available)
> schemaAtTxnValidation = schema at transaction validation (if available)
> 
> // Case 1: First commit ever
> if schemaAtTxnValidation is null:
>     return schemaOfTxn
> 
> // Case 2, 3: Second commit, first one committed during read-write phase
> if schemaAtTxnStart is null:
>     if schemaOfTxn != schemaAtTxnValidation:
>         throw ConcurrentSchemaEvolutionError
>     return schemaOfTxn
> 
> // Case 8: Multiple commits, potential concurrent schema evolution
> if schemaAtTxnStart != schemaOfTxn AND
>    schemaAtTxnStart != schemaAtTxnValidation AND
>    schemaOfTxn != schemaAtTxnValidation:
>     throw ConcurrentSchemaEvolutionError
> 
> // Compatible case 4,5
> if transaction start instant == transaction validation instant:
>     return schemaOfTxn
> 
> // Compatible case 7
> if schemaAtTxnStart == schemaAtTxnValidation:
>     return schemaOfTxn
> 
> // Compatible case 6
> return schemaAtTxnValidation
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
// Initialize schemas
writerSchemaOfTxn = writer schema of the current transaction
tableSchemaAtTxnStart = table schema at transaction start (if available)
tableSchemaAtTxnValidation = table schema at transaction validation (if available)

// Case 1: First commit ever
if tableSchemaAtTxnValidation is null:
    return writerSchemaOfTxn

// Case 2, 3: Second commit, first one committed during read-write phase
if tableSchemaAtTxnStart is null:
    if writerSchemaOfTxn != tableSchemaAtTxnValidation:
        throw ConcurrentSchemaEvolutionError
    return writerSchemaOfTxn

// Case 8: Multiple commits, potential concurrent schema evolution
if tableSchemaAtTxnStart != writerSchemaOfTxn AND
   tableSchemaAtTxnStart != tableSchemaAtTxnValidation AND
   writerSchemaOfTxn != tableSchemaAtTxnValidation:
    throw ConcurrentSchemaEvolutionError

// Compatible case 4,5
if transaction start instant == transaction validation instant:
    return writerSchemaOfTxn

// Compatible case 7
if tableSchemaAtTxnStart == tableSchemaAtTxnValidation:
    return writerSchemaOfTxn

// Compatible case 6
return tableSchemaAtTxnValidation
```
```

Author: done

Author: done

**Scenario 3**
```
Time ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------[ Commit Txn1 ]
            Creates Schema: S1

Txn2:            [ Start Txn2 ]------------------------[ Validate ]----X
                    Uses Schema: S2

Table Schema:
          [ Not Exists ]-----------------------[ S1 ]----------------------------------------
```
Notes:
- Txn2 starts when the table does not exist, intending to use schema S2.
- Txn1 commits before Txn2 validates, creating schema S1.
- At validation, Txn2 detects schema conflict (S1 vs. S2); transaction fails.

A future improvement is to check the compatibility between S1 and S2 and reconcile properly.

**Scenario 4**
```
Time ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->

Txn1:    [ Start Txn1 ]------------------------------[ Validate ]--------------------[ Commit Txn1 ]
            Uses Schema: S1                                                     Writes Schema: S1

Table Schema:
          [ S1 ]------------------------------------[ S1 ]----------------------------[ S1 ]
```
Notes:

> - Txn1 operates entirely under schema S1. (there is no concurrent writer or the concurrent writer does not evolve the table schema).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Txn1 operates entirely under schema S1 (there is no concurrent writer or the concurrent writer does not evolve the table schema).
```

Author: done

tableSchemaAtTxnStart = table schema at transaction start (if available)
tableSchemaAtTxnValidation = table schema at transaction validation (if available)

// Case 1: First commit ever
if tableSchemaAtTxnValidation is null:
  return writerSchemaOfTxn

// Case 2, 3: Second commit, one commit is done concurrently after this commit has started
if tableSchemaAtTxnStart is null:
  if writerSchemaOfTxn != tableSchemaAtTxnValidation:
    throw ConcurrentSchemaEvolutionError
  return writerSchemaOfTxn

// Table schema does not change at the pre-commit validation compared to the table schema at the start of the transaction
// Compatible case 4,5
if tableSchemaAtTxnStart == tableSchemaAtTxnValidation:
  return writerSchemaOfTxn

// Table schema has changed from the start of the transaction till the pre-commit validation

// Compatible case 7
if writerSchemaOfTxn == tableSchemaAtTxnValidation:
  return writerSchemaOfTxn

// Writer schema is different from the table schema at the pre-commit validation
// Compatible case 6
if writerSchemaOfTxn == tableSchemaAtTxnStart:
  return tableSchemaAtTxnValidation

// Case 8: Multiple commits, potential concurrent schema evolution

> throw ConcurrentSchemaEvolutionError

Reviewer: I've revised this part for clarity so it's easy to follow.

<!--
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
  contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
  this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
  The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
  (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
  the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
-->
# RFC-82: Concurrency control of schema evolution

## Proposers

- @jonvex
- @Davis-Zhang-Onehouse

## Approvers
- @yihua
- @sivabalan

## Status

JIRA: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HUDI-8221

## Abstract

> This RFC proposes to enhance Hudi's optimistic concurrency control mechanism to handle concurrent schema evolution scenarios. The current implementation does not adequately address conflicts that may arise when multiple transactions attempt to alter the table schema simultaneously. This enhancement aims to detect and prevent such conflicts, ensuring data consistency and integrity in multi-writer environments.

Reviewer: Could we extend this RFC to cover concurrent schema evolution in NBCC and any new concurrency control mechanism in general?

Author: I can keep this in a lower priority.
As of now I'm thinking to only push any items that allows the concurrent schema evolution change land in hudi internal. The cut off is next Monday.

Reviewer: Discussed offline that the detection of concurrent schema evolution is general to any concurrency control mechanism.

## Background

> Hudi supports optimistic concurrency control to handle concurrent write operations. However, the existing implementation does not specifically account for schema evolution conflicts. In a multi-writer environment, it's possible for different clients to attempt schema changes concurrently, which can lead to inconsistencies if not properly managed.

Reviewer: Let's separate design and implementation.  Let's frame the problem as handling concurrent schema updates in concurrency control, not just optimistic concurrency control.

Reviewer: In this case, the concurrent schema handling should be part of concurrency control, not just OCC.

Schema evolution is a critical operation that can significantly impact data compatibility and query results. Uncontrolled concurrent schema changes can result in data inconsistencies, failed reads, or incorrect query results. By extending the concurrency control mechanism to handle schema evolution, we can prevent these issues and ensure a more robust and reliable data management system.

> | Scenario | Schema when Txn Start | Schema when Txn Validates | Schema Used by curr Txn | Should Conflict? | Schema used by Commit Metadata of curr Txn | Notes |

Reviewer: Could you add another paragraph to give background on how the schema is used in Hudi, including the schema of the input data, the write schema used the write client for a transaction, the table schema stored in commit metadata on storage, etc.?  How these schemas are determined and how they are used currently in Hudi?

> | Scenario | Schema when Txn Start | Schema when Txn Validates | Schema Used by curr Txn | Should Conflict? | Schema used by Commit Metadata of curr Txn | Notes |

Reviewer: I assume you mean
```suggestion
| Scenario | Table Schema when Txn Start | Table Schema when Txn Validates | Write Schema Used by curr Txn | Should Conflict? | New Table Schema | Notes |
```
Also could you add a diagram to illustrate one of the examples to make it easier to understand?

Reviewer: Nit: for clarity of writing, use `transaction (txn)` before you use abbreviation.

Reviewer: Add an explanation on why table schema can change during the transaction, i.e., due to concurrent writer completing a schema evolution.

|----------|---------------------|--------------------------|-------------------|------------------|---------------------------------------|-------|
| 1 | Not exists | Not exists | S1 | No | S1 | Current txn is the first commit ever, conflict is impossible |
| 2 | Not exists | S1 | S1 | No | S1 | Second commit, no schema evolution |

> | 3 | Not exists | S1 | S2 | Yes | N/A (throws exception) | No predefined schema, effectively concurrent schema definition |

Reviewer: Is S2 can be evolved from S1, is that still OK?

Reviewer: How is this different from `| 5 | S1 | S1 | S2 | No | S2 | Schema evolution in current transaction |`?

Reviewer: Makes sense.  I think the notation can be more clear to avoid the confusion I had before.

| 4 | S1 | S1 | S1 | No | S1 | No schema evolution |
| 5 | S1 | S1 | S2 | No | S2 | Schema evolution in current transaction |

> | 6 | S1 | S2 | S1 | No | S2 | Backwards compatibility handles it |

Reviewer: Would be good to explain some of these cases in more details in new paragraphs, especially no. 6.

Author: added timeline in the appendix for better demostration

| 7 | S1 | S2 | S2 | No | S2 | Concurrent evolution to same schema |

> | 8 | S1 | S2 | S3 | Yes | N/A (throws exception) | Concurrent evolution to different schemas |

Reviewer: Same here.  The design decision made here is to identify this as schema conflict for simplicity.  It can also be broken down into cases where (1) S3 is evolvable from S2, (2) S3 is not evolvable from S2, for further optimization.

Notes:

> - S1, S2, S3 represent different schemas

Reviewer: Could you explain the relationship among these schema, e.g., is S2 evolved from S1, are S2 and S3 compatible?

Reviewer: Would be good to make the notation and definition super clear.

Author: revised.

- 3 schemas to consider:
  + The table schema from the last committed txn when the current txn starts.
  + The table schema from the last committed txn when the current txn validates.
  + The table schema that the current txn uses.

> - "Not exists" means there were no completed transactions at that point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Not exists" means the table is empty and table schema is not set.
```

Author: done

Key observations:
1. Conflicts are avoided when schemas are the same or when backwards compatibility can handle the changes.
2. The first commit to an empty table is always allowed, but concurrent first commits with different schemas will conflict.
3. Conflicts occur when there are concurrent, incompatible schema changes. the compatibility exmaination is kept naive - as long as S2 and S3 are not the same, they are considered as a conflict. In the future we can think of come up with intellegent algorithm to further resolve the conflicts for better concurrency.

## Implementation

The proposed implementation involves the following key changes:

1. Enhance the `TransactionUtils` class to include schema conflict detection:

>    - Add a new method `abortTxnOnConcurrentSchemaEvolution` to check for schema conflicts.

Reviewer: Should we introduce a schema conflict resolution interface?

Author: we can delay till there is a use case of having multiple implementations.

As of now we just have resolveConcurrentSchemaEvolution as a very simple function capturing the logic above. In the future we can hide anything need to be extended behind this function.

Reviewer 2: So we are assuming the schema evolution is also based on OCC instead of NB-CC right?

Author: from my POV yes, I'm not familiar with NBCC of hudi. @yihua please comment here

Author: Discussed with Ethan, the approach works for any concurrency control mechanism that 
- do "read phase"-"write phase" -"validation and commit phase"
- And validation phases of concurrent txn are serialized (For OCC I know we acquire a lock to achieve this)

so for both NBCC and OCC it works

Reviewer: Yes.  Let's add a new interface `SchemaConflictResolutionStrategy` as the abstraction for schema conflict resolution in the multi-writer scenarios and a new implementation `SimpleSchemaConflictResolutionStrategy` containing the proposed logic.

Author: Revised
